### AKR Family Descriptions

**<u>AKR Family 1.</u>** AKR1 enzymes control the concentrations of active
ligands for nuclear receptors and control their ligand occupancy and
transactivation. Furthermore, AKR1 enzymes regulate the amount of neurosteroids
that can regulate the activity of GABAa and NMDA receptors. Therefore, AKR1
enzymes are typically involved in the pre-receptor regulation of nuclear as well
as membrane bound receptors. In addition, altered expression of individual AKR1C
genes is related to the development of prostate, breast, and endometrial cancer.
Mutations in AKR1C1 and AKR1C4 are responsible for sexual development
dysgenesis, and mutation in AKR1D1 are causative in blie acid deficiency.

**<u>AKR Family 2.</u>** Members of the AKR2 family are categorized as microbial
enzymes consisting of xylose reductases. AKR2B1 - AKR2B6 are classified as
yeasts, while AKR2C and AKR2D are classified as fungi. The function of xylose
reductases is to catalyze the first step of xylose metabolism. During this
process xylose reductase, which is an NADPH- or NADH- dependent enzyme, will
oxidize xylose to xylitol. While this occurs, the NAD+ dependent enzyme xylitol
dehydrogenase (XDH) reduces xylitol to xylulose. Under microaerophilic
conditions, yeasts like Kluyveromyces, Pichia, and Pachysolen are capable of
fermenting xylose to ethanol.

**<u>AKR Family 3.</u>** Similar to the AKR2 family, members of the AKR3 family
are categorized as microbial enzymes and are yeasts. For example, AKR3A1, known
as Gcylp, catalyzes the reduction of several aldehyde substrates including
D,L-glyceraldehyde. In addition, YPRI (AKR3A2) has been shown to contribute 50%
of in vivo 2-methylbutyraldehyde reductase activity. Furthermore, deletion of
the GRE3 gene encoding S. cerevisiae aldose reductase (AKR2B6) leads to a
decrease in xylitol formation from xylose by 50%.

**<u>AKR Family 4.</u>** Members of AKR Family 4 are classified as plant-based
AKR’s. These AKRs have many functions including biotic and abiotic stress
defense, production of commercially important secondary metabolites, iron
acquisition from soil, and plant-microbe interactions. Plant AKR’s have not been
well studied, however a few of AKR4’s functionality are known. For instance, the
AKR4C family is known to be involved in aldehyde detoxification and stress
defense, osmolyte production, secondary metabolism, and membrane transport. For
example, AKR4C8 and AKR4C9 from Arabidopsis thaliana (Arabidopsis) can reduce a
range of toxic compounds containing reactive aldehyde groups. In contrast,
AKR4C7 from maize (Zea mays) catalyzes the oxidation of sorbitol to Glc.

**<u>AKR Family 5.</u>** Similar to Family 2 and Family 3, AKR Family 5 is
categorized as microbial AKR’s. AKR5C, AKR5D, and AKR5B, are classified as
bacteria; AKR5E and AKR5F are classified as yeasts; finally, AKR5E is classified
as a fungi. While majority of the functionality of the AKR5 family is unknown,
AKR5D is responsible for the NADPH-dependent stereospecific reduction of
2,5-diketo-D-gluconate to 2-keto-L-gulonate, a precursor in the industrial
production of vitamin C.

**<u>AKR Family 6.</u>** The AKR6 family is found in humans, and contains the
beta-subunits of the voltage-gated potassium channel. These AKR6 family members
are structurally characterized by having an extra helix attached to a long loop
between β9 and α7, and the proteins forms tetramers. Furthermore, In the AKR6
family, the N-terminal β1-β2 hairpin (Y39-G46) forms a part of the tetramer
intersubunit interface: together with the closely located R109-S111 segment
(Kvβ2-AKR6A5 numbering) from the α2-β5 loop at the bottom of the barrel it
interacts with the loop β5-α3 (consisting of amino acid residues K124-R129) at
the top (C-terminal end) of another barrel. Interestingly the regions involved
in the intersubunit interaction are >92% conserved within the AKR6 family, but
do not share homology with AKRs from other families.

**<u>AKR Family 7.</u>** The AKR7 family contains the aflatoxin dialdehyde
reductases. Members of the AKR7 family can be found in several species. For
example AKR7A2 and AKR7A3 are found in humans, AKR7A1 and AKR7A4 are found in
rats, and AKR7A5 is found in mice. The purpose of the AKR7 family is typically
to reduce aldehyde to alcohol, however some do have more specific functions. For
example, AKR7A2 is involved in the metabolism of daunorubicin to the cardiotoxic
daunorubicinol.

**<u>AKR Family 8.</u>** AKR Family 8 is also classified as a microbial AKR
family. Both AKR8A1 and AKR8A2 are known as pyridoxal reductase and can be found
in yeast. The function of pyridoxal reductase is to catalyze the NADPH-mediated
reduction of pyridoxal to pyridoxine.

**<u>AKR Family 9.</u>** AKR Family 9 is classified as a microbial AKR family.
For example, AKR9C falls under the archaebacteria division; AKR9B1-B4 falls
under the yeasts division, and AKR9A1-A3 falls under the Fungi category. These
enzymes vary immensely and have differing functions. For example, AKR9A1, known
as a sterigmatocystin dehydrogenase is involved in the biosynthesis of a fungal
secondary metabolite. Another example is AKR9A2, which is involved in aflatoxin
biosynthesis. On the contrary, AKR9C, known as oxi reductase catalyzes the
transfer of electrons from one molecule (the oxidant, the hydrogen or the
electron donor) to another molecule (the reductant, the hydrogen or electron
acceptor).

**<u>AKR Family 11.</u>** Members of the AKR11 family, which are AKR11A and
AKR11B are both classified as bacterial AKR’s. Their respective enzyme names are
IolS and GSP69, and they both have the same function of reducing substrates
DL-glyceraldehyde, D-erythrose and methylglyoxal in the presence of NADPH.

**<u>AKR Family 12.</u>** Members of the AKR12 family are known as Streptomyces
sugar aldehyde reductases. AKR12A from Streptomyces fradiae, andAKR12C from
Streptomyces avermitilis, are also thought to play roles as reductases in
L-mycarose and L-oleandrose biosynthesis respectively. However, a role for these
latter two enzymes through the use of gene mutation/deletion has not been
proven.

**<u>AKR Family 13.</u>** Members of AKR13 are classified as hyperthermophilic
bacteria reductases. These enzymes are involved in protein thermostabilization,
including ion pairs, hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic interactions, disulfide
bridges, packing, decrease of the entropy of unfolding, and intersubunit
interactions.
