### Nomenclature

The general format for AKR names is as follows: the root symbol 'AKR' for
Aldo-Keto Reductase; an Arabic number designating the family; a letter
indicating the subfamily when multiple subfamilies exist; and an Arabic numeral
representing the unique protein sequence. Under the system, the protein AKR1A1
would be the first AKR in family 1, subfamily A, and in this instance
corresponds to human aldehyde reductase.

**<u>Definition of Families.</u>** Delineation of families occurs at the 40%
amino acid identity level. Members of an AKR family should have < 40% amino acid
identity with any other family. At present, the sixteen families defined by our
cluster analysis satisfy this criterion.

**<u>Definition of Subfamilies.</u>** Within a given family, subfamilies may be
defined by a > 60% identity in amino acid sequence among subfamily members. By
this definition, nine of sixteen AKR families include multiple subfamilies. For
example, family AKR1 includes the following subfamilies: AKR1C1-AKR1C4 and
AKR1D1, which play critical roles in the metabolism of all steroid hormones,
conjugated steroids, synthetic therapeutic steroids, and the synthesis of
neurosteroids and bile acids. Numbering of the known members of each subfamily
was assigned in an arbitrary fashion. For example, AKR1A1, AKR1A2, and AKR1A3
are the aldehyde reductases from human, pig, and rat, respectively. Any new
additions to a subfamily are numbered chronologically.

**<u>Allelic Variants versus Isoforms.</u>** Allelic variation may occur between
superfamily members. We propose that proteins with > 97% amino acid sequence
identity are alleles of the same gene unless: they have different enzyme
activities; they are encoded by different cDNA's, usually evident by a distinct
3'-untranslated region (UTR); and they are derived from genes of different
structure. While AKR1C1 [human dihydrodiol dehydrogenases 1 (DD1)], and AKR1C2
[human dihydrodiol dehydrogenases 2 (DD2)] are 98% identical in amino acid
sequence and have 3'-UTRs which are 97% identical, the substrate specificity and
function of these proteins are quite different. AKR1C1 is predominantly a
20Î±-HSD while AKR1C2 is the major bile acid binding protein in human liver.
Based on these functional differences, we have assigned AKR1C1 and AKR1C2 as
unique members of the AKR superfamily.

**<u>Dimeric Proteins.</u>** Multimers are proteins which consist of multiple
monomers. Although majority of all AKR proteins are monomeric proteins,
approximately 320 amino acids in length, the AKR2 (which includes the xylose
reductases), AKR6 (which includes the b-subunits of the voltage-gated potassium
channel), and AKR7 (which contains the aflatoxin dialdehyde reductases) families
have been shown to form multimers. To expand the nomenclature to accommodate
multimers we recommend that the composition and stoichiometry be listed. For
example, AKR7A1:AKR7A4 (1:3) would designate a tetramer of the composition
indicated.

**<u>AKR Genes.</u>** The designation for an AKR superfamily gene should be
noted in italics to distinguish between the gene and the protein. For example,
the gene *AKR1A1* encodes the protein AKR1A1.

The above nomenclature system was adopted at the 8th International Workshop on
the Enzymology and Molecular Biology of Carbonyl Metabolism. It is similar to
that for the cytochrome P450 superfamily, but, unlike that system, amino acid
sequences are used for comparisons. For historical reasons, the AKR1A subfamily
represents the aldehyde reductases and the AKR1B subfamily represents the aldose
reductase. We recommend that authors referencing members of the AKR superfamily
use any previous names along with the new designation in parenthesis - for
example, human aldehyde reductase (AKR1A1).
